FrodoKEM Cryptodoc (#117)
sehlen-bsi/botan-docs: docs/cryptodoc/src/05_09_frodokem.rst

   +---------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
   | :math:`B`           |  .. centered:: 2                             | .. centered:: 3                              | .. centered:: 4                                |
   +---------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
   | :math:`len_A`       |  .. centered:: 128                           | .. centered:: 128                            | .. centered:: 128                              |
   +---------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{sec}`   |  .. centered:: 128                           | .. centered:: 192                            | .. centered:: 256                              |
   +---------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------------------------+

>    | :math:`\text{SHAKE}`|  .. centered:: SHAKE128                      | .. centered:: SHAKE256                       | .. centered:: SHAKE256                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   | :math:`\text{SHAKE}`|  .. centered:: SHAKE-128                     | .. centered:: SHAKE-256                      | .. centered:: SHAKE-256                        |
```

   | :ref:`Matrix Operations <pubkey/frodokem/matrix_operations>`   | :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/frodo_matrix.h`      | Matrices and operations on them                                                                                                                                                        |
   +----------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
   | FrodoKEM                                                       | :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/frodokem.h`          | FrodoKEM :ref:`Key Generation <pubkey/frodokem/key_generation>`, :ref:`Encapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/encapsulation>`, :ref:`Decapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/decapsulation>`            |

>    +----------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Reviewer: Frankly, I think we shouldn't go into such detail. The code is approachable enough that people will find their way around it, if they have the need to do so. There's not much this table adds to the documentation and we'll need to remember to keep this table updated if things change. 🤡

.. _pubkey/frodokem:

FrodoKEM
=================

Botan's FrodoKEM implementation is found in
:srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/` and follows [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.

> The parameter sets shown in tables below are supported.

Reviewer 2: The parameter sets shown in the tables below are supported.

> The parameter sets shown in tables below are supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The parameter sets shown in the tables below are supported.
```

   +----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_A`        | 128                     | 128                     | 128                      |
   +----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{sec}`    | 128                     | 192                     | 256                      |
   +----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`\text{SHAKE}` | SHAKE-128               | SHAKE-256               | SHAKE-256                |
   +----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{SE}`     | 128                     | 192                     | 256                      |
   +----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{salt}`   | 0                       | 0                       | 0                        |
   +----------------------+-------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+

> The implementation consists of several components, which are shown in the table below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation consists of several components; these are shown in the table below.
```

   | FrodoKEM                                                       | :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/frodokem_common/frodokem.h`        | FrodoKEM :ref:`Key Generation <pubkey/frodokem/key_generation>`, :ref:`Encapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/encapsulation>`, :ref:`Decapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/decapsulation>`            |
   +----------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Algorithm Internals
-------------------

..  _pubkey/frodokem/types:

Types
^^^^^

For similar reasons as for :ref:`SPHINCS+ strong types <signatures/sphincsplus/types>`,
Botan's FrodoKEM implementation relies on the use of strong types.
As most data is just defined as byte sequences, the usage of strong types ensures that
the correct data is used at each step of the computation.

> More concretely, strong types for the different kinds of seeds, random samples, matrix
> representations, and plaintexts are used in addition to types corresponding to the values
> :math:`salt`, :math:`k`, and :math:`pkh` of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More concretely, strong types are used for the different kinds of seeds, random samples, matrix
representations, and plaintexts as well as for the values
:math:`salt`, :math:`k`, and :math:`pkh` as found in [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.
```

..  _pubkey/frodokem/modes:

Modes and Constants
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The implementation realizes all parameter sets shown in Table

> :ref:`Supported FrodoKEM signature algorithms <pubkey/frodokem/parameter_table>`.

Reviewer 2: The linked table does not contain any reference to signatures in the title. Should maybe be changed to avoid confusion?

Reviewer: Certainly. No idea where the mention of "signature" came from. Copy & Paste oversight, perhaps?

> Parameter sets are represented by an enum-like class ``FrodoKEMMode``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Parameter sets are represented as instances of the enum-like class ``FrodoKEMMode``.
```

> The parameters, including the function :math:`\text{SHAKE}` of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_, are instantiated
> via the ``FrodoKEMConstants`` class given a mode. Furthermore, this class also contains

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a mode has been selected, the parameters as well as the function :math:`\text{SHAKE}` of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_ are instantiated
via the ``FrodoKEMConstants`` class. Furthermore, this class also contains
```

> the distribution table entries (see Table A.4 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the distribution table entries required for sampling (see Table A.4 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_).
```

..  _pubkey/frodokem/matrix_operations:

Matrix Operations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> FrodoKEM heavily relies on matrix operations, which are implemented in Botan

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FrodoKEM heavily relies on matrix operations which are implemented in Botan
```

within the ``FrodoMatrix`` class. Specifically, factory methods to create or store matrices
according to the :math:`Encode` (Section 7.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_),
:math:`Decode` (Section 7.2), :math:`Pack` (Section 7.3), :math:`Unpack` (Section 7.3),
and :math:`SampleMatrix` (Section 7.4 and 7.5) functions are provided, thereby realizing
the respective functions in accordance with the specification.

The implementation does not explicitly provide the :math:`Gen` function (Section 7.6
of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_) to create the large public matrix :math:`A` from :math:`seed_A`.
Instead, to avoid having the entire matrix :math:`A` in memory for just one use per operation,
the desired elements of :math:`A` are derived from :math:`seed_A` on demand when matrix

> multiplication is performed. This is done with callable generator functions that generate
> the rows of :math:`A`, depending on whether AES-128 or SHAKE-128 is used, and correspond to
> Sections 7.6.1 and 7.6.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multiplication is performed. This is done via callable generator functions which generate
the required rows of :math:`A` and correspond to
Section 7.6.1 or 7.6.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_, depending on whether AES-128 or SHAKE-128 is used.
```

> Moreover, the implementation does not perform the transpose operations on the matrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moreover, the implementation does not perform the transpose operation on the matrix
```

:math:`S^T` to obtain :math:`S` as in the pseudocode of Section 8 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_

> when computing :math:`B = AS + E` and :math:`B'S`. Instead, it performs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when computing :math:`B = AS + E` and :math:`B'S` during key generation and decapsulation, respectively. Instead, it performs
```

the matrix operations directly on input :math:`S^T` to obtain the desired result
without an expensive transpose operation.

Consequently, each unique combination of matrix operations used by FrodoKEM
:ref:`Key Generation <pubkey/frodokem/key_generation>`,
:ref:`Encapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/encapsulation>`, and
:ref:`Decapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/decapsulation>` is implemented as a

> ``FrodoMatrix`` factory method. Hence, the operations :math:`AS + E`, :math:`S'A + E'`,

Reviewer: I'm guessing you meant to remove the comma before the "and".

> :math:`S'B + E''`, and :math:`B'S` each have a corresponding method. Additionally, generic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`S'B + E''` and :math:`B'S` each have a corresponding method. Additionally, generic
```

addition and subtraction methods are provided.
The methods for :math:`AS + E` and :math:`S'A + E'` make use of manual loop unrolling
to speed up performance according to [BORSvV21]_.

Since the implementations of the underlying matrix operations
do not perform the neccessary reduction :math:`\text{mod}\, q`, a ``FrodoMatrix``

> possesses a ``reduce`` method, reducing all elements :math:`\text{mod}\, q` and thereby
> realizing :math:`\mathbb{Z}_q` of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
possesses a ``reduce`` method, reducing all elements modulo :math:`q` and thereby
producing matrices with entries in :math:`\mathbb{Z}_q` as required by [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.
```

> Finally, the ``FrodoMatrix`` class contains a method ``constant_time_compare`` to check
> for equality to an input matrix in constant time, using Botan's constant time comparison.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, the ``FrodoMatrix`` class contains the method ``constant_time_compare`` which uses Botan's constant time comparison to check
for equality to an input matrix in constant time.
```

Reviewer 2: specify what the input matrix is compared to

   **Output:**

   -  ``shared_key``: shared key

   **Steps:**

   1. ``b_p = unpack(c_1, n_bar, n)``
   2. ``c = unpack(c_2, n_bar, n_bar)``
   3. ``m = c - b_p*s``
   4. ``seed_u_p = decode(m)``
   5.  ``seed_se_p || k_p = SHAKE(pkh || seed_u_p || salt, len_se + len_sec)``
   6. ``r = SHAKE(0x96 || seed_se_p, 16*(2*n_bar*n + n_bar*n_bar))``
   7. ``s_p = sample_matrix(r[:n*n_bar - 1])``
   8. ``e_p = sample_matrix(r[n*n_bar:2*n*n_bar - 1])``
   9.  ``b_pp = s_p*a + e_p``
   10. ``e_pp = sample_matrix(r[2*n*n_bar:])``
   11. ``v = s_p*b + e_pp``
   12. ``c_p = v + encode(seed_u_p)``
   13. ``b_pp.reduce()`` and ``c_p.reduce()``
   14. If ``b_p = b_pp`` and ``c = c_p`` set ``k_bar = k_p``, otherwise set ``k_bar = s``
   15. ``shared_key = SHAKE(encap_key || k_bar, len_sec)``

   **Notes:**

   - The computation of ``b_p*s`` is done by a specialised function working on the input ``s_trans``.
   - The computations of ``s_p*a + e_p`` and ``s_p*b + e_pp`` are done by specialised functions,
     as noted in :ref:`FrodoKEM Encapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/encapsulation>`.
   - ``b = unpack(packed_b)`` is already performed in the constructor of ``FrodoKEM_PrivateKey``.

>    - ``b_pp`` and ``c_p`` require manual reduction in step 13 because ``b_p`` and ``c`` are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - ``b_pp`` and ``c_p`` require manual reduction in Step 13 because ``b_p`` and ``c`` are
```

.. _pubkey/frodokem:

FrodoKEM
=================

Botan's FrodoKEM implementation is found in
:srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/` and follows [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.

> The parameter sets shown in the tables below are supported.

Reviewer 2: Could it be useful to mention here that eFrodoKEM is a variant prohibiting key reuse?

.. _pubkey/frodokem/parameter_table:

> .. table::  Supported FrodoKEM parameter sets (see Tables A.1 and A.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_). ``<PRG>`` can either be ``AES`` or ``SHAKE``, depending on whether AES-128 or SHAKE-128 is used for expanding the seed for the matrix :math:`A`.

Reviewer 2: PRG is not defined anywhere in the documentation. Would it be possible to include that it means pseudorandom generator somewhere?

Reviewer: I renamed it to DRBG which is perhaps a more common abbreviation.

Instead, to avoid having the entire matrix :math:`A` in memory for just one use per operation,
the desired elements of :math:`A` are derived from :math:`seed_A` on demand when matrix
multiplication is performed. This is done via callable generator functions which generate
the required rows of :math:`A` and correspond to
Section 7.6.1 or 7.6.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_, depending on whether AES-128 or SHAKE-128 is used.

Moreover, the implementation does not perform the transpose operation on the matrix
:math:`S^T` to obtain :math:`S` as in the pseudocode of Section 8 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_
when computing :math:`B = AS + E` and :math:`B'S` during key generation and decapsulation, respectively. Instead, it performs
the matrix operations directly on input :math:`S^T` to obtain the desired result
without an expensive transpose operation.

Consequently, each unique combination of matrix operations used by FrodoKEM
:ref:`Key Generation <pubkey/frodokem/key_generation>`,
:ref:`Encapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/encapsulation>` and
:ref:`Decapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/decapsulation>` is implemented as a
``FrodoMatrix`` factory method. Hence, the operations :math:`AS + E`, :math:`S'A + E'`,

> :math:`S'B + E''` and :math:`B'S` each have a corresponding method. Additionally, generic

Reviewer 2: It would be useful to name the methods here (e.g. FrodoMatrix::mul_add_sb_plus_e) and then we can refer back to this location when the notes/bullet points for the KeyGen, Encaps and Decaps refer to 'a specialised function' later on.

Author: Similar discussion as https://github.com/sehlen-bsi/botan-docs/pull/117#discussion_r1480040327 - in previous cryptodocs, the text became very unreadable due to a lot of long C++ function names, so we decided against that. But we could make the modification if you see it as important in this case.

addition and subtraction methods are provided.
The methods for :math:`AS + E` and :math:`S'A + E'` make use of manual loop unrolling
to speed up performance according to [BORSvV21]_.

Since the implementations of the underlying matrix operations
do not perform the neccessary reduction :math:`\text{mod}\, q`, a ``FrodoMatrix``
possesses a ``reduce`` method, reducing all elements modulo :math:`q` and thereby
producing matrices with entries in :math:`\mathbb{Z}_q` as required by [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.

Finally, the ``FrodoMatrix`` class contains the method ``constant_time_compare``
which uses Botan's constant time comparison to check for equality to an input
matrix in constant time. This is used during decapsulation, specifically in Step 14
of :ref:`Key Decapsulation <pubkey/frodokem/decapsulation>`, to ensure that the
re-encryption yields the same ciphertext as the presented encapsulation.

..  _pubkey/frodokem/key_generation:

Key Generation
--------------

FrodoKEM key generation follows Section 8.1 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_ and is

> implemented within the ``FrodoKEM_PrivateKey`` constructor. It works as follows:

Reviewer 2: Can we give a link to the location in the code?

   -  ``SK``, ``PK``: private and public key

   **Steps:**

   1. Generate new values ``s``, ``seed_se``, and ``z`` using ``rng``
   2. ``seed_a = SHAKE(z, len_a)``
   3. ``r = SHAKE(0x5F || seed_se, 32*n*n_bar)``
   4. ``s_trans = sample_matrix(r[:n*n_bar - 1])``
   5. ``e = sample_matrix(r[n*n_bar:])``
   6. ``b = a*s + e``
   7. | ``PK = {seed_a, pack(b)}``
      | ``pkh = SHAKE(PK, len_sec)``
      | ``SK = {s, seed_a, pack(b), s_trans, pkh}``

   **Notes:**

   - Computation of ``b = a*s + e`` is done by a specialised function that performs on-demand
     expansion of ``seed_a`` into the desired row of the matrix :math:`A` of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_
     and assumes getting the transpose ``s_trans`` of ``s`` as input to avoid transposition.
   - The operation ``pack(b)`` is performed when accessing the serialized or raw key bits of
     a key.
   - The computation of ``pkh`` is performed in the constructor of ``FrodoKEM_PublicKeyInternal``,
     an internal class used to represent ``PK``.
   - The creation of a ``FrodoKEM_PublicKey`` is conducted using the
     ``public_key`` method of the private key.

..  _pubkey/frodokem/encapsulation:

Key Encapsulation
-----------------

> The FrodoKEM encapsulation procedure of Botan follows Section 8.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_ and

Reviewer 2: Again, can we give a link to the location in the code?

   **Output:**

   - ``encapsulated_key``: ciphertext of shared key
   - ``shared_key``: plaintext shared key

   **Steps:**

   1. Generate new values ``u`` and ``salt`` using ``rng``
   2.  ``seed_se || k = SHAKE(pkh || u || salt, len_se + len_sec)``
   3. ``r = SHAKE(0x96 || seed_se, 16*(2*n_bar*n + n_bar*n_bar))``
   4. ``s_p = sample_matrix(r[:n*n_bar - 1])``
   5. ``e_p = sample_matrix(r[n*n_bar:2*n*n_bar - 1])``
   6. ``b_p = s_p*a + e_p``
   7. ``c_1 = pack(b_p)``
   8. ``e_pp = sample_matrix(r[2*n*n_bar:])``
   9.  ``v = s_p*b + e_pp``
   10. ``c = v + encode(u)``
   11. ``c_2 = pack(c)``
   12. ``encapsulated_key = c_1 || c_2 || salt``
   13. ``shared_key = SHAKE(encapsulated_key || k, len_sec)``

   **Notes:**

   - The computation of ``pkh`` is already performed in the constructor of ``FrodoKEM_PublicKeyInternal``,
     an internal class used to represent ``PK``.
   - ``b = unpack(packed_b)`` is already performed in the constructor of ``FrodoKEM_PublicKey``.
   - The computation of ``s_p*a + e_p`` is done by a specialised function that performs on-demand
     expansion of ``seed_a`` into the desired row of the matrix :math:`A` of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_.

>    - The computation of ``s_p*b + e_pp`` is done by a specialised function realising this sequence

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - The computation of ``s_p*b + e_pp`` is done by the specialised function `FrodoMatrix::mul_add_sb_plus_e` realising this sequence
```

     of operations.

..  _pubkey/frodokem/decapsulation:

Key Decapsulation
-----------------

> The FrodoKEM encapsulation procedure of Botan follows Section 8.3 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_ and

Reviewer 2: Can we give a link to the location in the code?

Author: We could, in fact we did so for Kyber and Dilithium. However, the text then became very cumbersome to read so based on prior feedback we introduced overview tables to see which logic is implemented in what code location. Probably related to https://github.com/sehlen-bsi/botan-docs/pull/117#discussion_r1328680313

Reviewer 2: I think making FrodoKEM encapsulation in this line clickable to the location in the code where the algorithm is implemented would be helpful to certain readers while not inconveniencing others.

Reviewer: I'm not against deep-linking to source locations. In fact, I do agree that this certainly is helpful to readers.

However, links to specific code locations always come with a certain maintenance burden. Whenever we refactor code (eg. https://github.com/randombit/botan/pull/3887), we need to remember and update these links in the documentation; especially when they point to a certain code location.

Given that the crypto documentation is meant to be a "living document" that gets updated as Botan evolves, links may become broken or stale. The central tables can be kept up-to-date fairly easily. Scattered links in the prose are more of a maintenance burden.

Perhaps we could extend our existing `:srcref:` rST-Extension to:
a) allow links to specific lines in the code (currently it supports linking to files only)
b) add an "expected text token", that can be checked automatically in CI

For instance (inventing some rST syntax here):

```
The FrodoKEM encapsulation (as implemented in :srcref:`src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/frodokem_common/frodokem.cpp#L89 <raw_key_encrypt>`) ...
```

In [the "linked" source location](https://github.com/randombit/botan/blob/7f15ce7b39d6bd34dda9af4d2cb08a6e18c64c01/src/lib/pubkey/frodokem/frodokem_common/frodokem.cpp#L89) we actually implement `raw_kem_encrypt`. A CI script could fetch the file and check that it (1) exists, (2) has a line "89" and (3) that line contains the string "raw_kem_encrypt". That should be good enough to detect stale deep links automatically and remove their maintenance burden.

Reviewer 2: I completely understand that deep-linking comes with a lot of extra maintenance work, so I agree that manually inputting these links will not be sustainable in the long run. However, I think your suggested extension of the srcref-functionality to facilitate such "clever" linking would really improve the document if it is feasible to implement.

Reviewer: `:srcref:` Functionality is implemented [here](https://github.com/sehlen-bsi/botan-docs/pull/188). Once merged, we can rebase this PR and use it here.

Reviewer: I linked to the relevant locations in the upstream source file. Note that I added a specific (partial) path instead of just making the existing text clickable. reStructuredText has a limitation that makes is overly complicated to next backticked markups (i.e. \`\`FrodoKEM_PrivateKey`` inside a :srcref:\`text \<path>` block) 😞

Reviewer: Since I accidentally created a typo in the link that was caught by CI: Here's how a misaligned deep-link would show up in CI:

![image](https://github.com/sehlen-bsi/botan-docs/assets/1562139/aa34383f-df74-45bc-9117-aebad1627ea4)

Reviewer: FWIW: The one and only deep-link I added in #188 [got outdated already, CI detected it and I had to fix it](https://github.com/sehlen-bsi/botan-docs/pull/189#issuecomment-1952479493). ;)

> Key Decapsulation
> -----------------
> 
> The FrodoKEM encapsulation procedure of Botan follows Section 8.3 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_ and

Reviewer 3: While copying/pasting the structure for our Classic McElieces crypto doc, I noticed this one:
```suggestion
Key Decapsulation
-----------------

The FrodoKEM decapsulation procedure of Botan follows Section 8.3 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_ and
```

   +----------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_A`        | 128                      | 128                     | 128                      |
   +----------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{sec}`    | 128                      | 192                     | 256                      |
   +----------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`\text{SHAKE}` | SHAKE-128                | SHAKE-256               | SHAKE-256                |
   +----------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{SE}`     | 256                      | 384                     | 512                      |
   +----------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
   | :math:`len_{salt}`   | 256                      | 384                     | 512                      |
   +----------------------+--------------------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+

> .. table::  Supported eFrodoKEM parameter sets (see Tables A.1 and A.2 of [FrodoKEM-ISO]_). Note that these are ephemeral modes of the algorithm and the public key may not be used more than once. ``<DRBG>`` can either be ``AES`` or ``SHAKE``, depending on whether AES-128 or SHAKE-128 is used for expanding the seed for the matrix :math:`A`.

Reviewer: Fixed in #201 and backported to the finalized 3.3.0 documentation in #202.
